---
question: Are digital minds possible in principle?
position: yes
elaboration: ...
---

There are three senses that this question carries. The first is if a computer as
we know them today could realize mental experiences of the same kind that we
have. Think of any conscious experience that you've ever had and then this
question is a matter of realizing that same experience with a computer. To this
sense of the question, I say, no. This is not physically possible. On this I'll
say more later. The second sense of the question is as to whether computers as
we know them today could realize any kind of mind even if distinct from our own
kind. To this I say, probably. In the typical discourse on this topic I don't
see this distinction being often made or when it is made it's done so in passing
with very little import placed on it. But since the qualitative character of
mental experience is at the core of the hard problem of consciousness, this
distinction is essential. Just what about a physical state determines the
qualities of being in such a state. And what about the qualities of being in
such a state determine its causal efficacy in the world? On a physicalist world
view, changing the phsycial characteristics of a state ought to change the
qualities of being in that state if it's like anything at all. And for a
phenomenal realist, something about the qualities of being in a state ought to
make a difference in the causal efficacy of that state. So if we could create a
computer that behaved in every way like a biological brain, then we should have
good reason to believe that it is like something to be that computer and what it
is like is exactly what it is like to be the corresponding brain states if
phenomenal realism is true. But the converse must also true. If the physical
states of the computer are different in kind from the brain states then the
qualities of being in those states must be different from the qualities of being
in the corresponding brain states. And since computers are in no way
materialistically or structurally like brains we ought to conclude that there
are no physical grounds for accepting that being in any computer state would be
qualitatively like being in brain states. But since those computer states are
physical, it could be like something to be in those states.

The third sense is becoming more common: can a computer perform tasks that
humans can do. This is a purely functional sense. The only aspect of importance
about minds is utility. Oddly, utility historically has not been an important
aspect in the philosophy of mind. For example, the problem of other minds is the
problem of lacking a way of reliably knowing despite behavior whether or not
objects other than yourself have minds. So, accepting that utility is enough to
establish mentality seems rather naive. After all, on a hot summer day, you
could sit at my feet beneath my casted shadow as though I were a tree and yet I
can promise you that I will remain not a tree. In general, the less specific our
questions and the more vague our intrests, the more satisfied we will be with a
multitude of answers that contradict each other. There is no response that
stands as an answer without a relation to a specific question.

I accept a physicalist thesis that everything that exists in our world is
physical and not spiritual or magical or otherwise non-physical. The problem
with this question is that "digital"
