---
question: Is mind uploading possible in principle?
position: No
inspiration: https://www.reddit.com/r/artificial/s/35sttrXqb0
elaboration: Is it possible, if only in principle, to scan a human brain and relocate its mental activity to a digital computer such that the conscious mind once “in” the brain is instead “in” the computer?
published: true
---

We don't fully understand the nature of consciousness, but it seems to me that we know enough about the physical world to answer this question confidently: **No**.  Mind uploading is not physically possible. It is common for people to interpret this question in terms of technical ability rather than physical possibility. There are no technical advancements standing between us and mind uploading because mind uploading isn't possible in principle.

How do I ground this conclusion?

There are many competing theories of mind and positions on the hard problem, but there is only one that we need to rule out to support this conclusion: Dualism. As long as everything in our world is physical, ruling out spirits/ghosts/magic and the like, then our conscious experiences are in some yet un-agreed upon way, physical. With this important foundation, we can then ask about any physical item, like, say, a table. Can a table be uploaded? It seems obvious to me that the question barely makes sense but it is quite common today for people to conflate the physical with the abstract. Perhaps a detailed scan of the table could be performed leading to a simulated table on a computer screen. Perhaps more still the rendering of the table is "added" to a physics simulator so that items can be "placed" on it. The first problem is that simulations even of the physical world are not clearly physical themselves beyond the hardware that they run on. We interpret them to be about a physical world but are not themselves physical. You can tell that this is the case by attempting to physically interacting with them--you can't.

A larger problem remains, however, even before the issues with simulation. After the scan the "original" table would still be physically present. Even granting some physical existence to the resulting simulated table, it would be a duplicate of the original table. "Uploading" in the typical computational sense is always a process of duplication and not relocation. When you transfer a digital file from one device to another a copy is made and the original is destroyed. So too for the table. After scanning, it would need to be destroyed to create the illusion of being "moved" into the digital realm.

If you read a book, you do not become the book, but gain knowledge about the book. In a similar way, a scan of a physical object does not become the object but is in some sense about the object. But perhaps we attempt to maintain the physicality of the table to avoid this change in kind. What if, like with the ship of Theseus, we replace one part of the table with a different piece of similar though distinct material until all of the original table has been replaced with new material. At no point did it stop being a table in a functional sense and never were there two distinct tables. Some people claim to take this view of mind uploading. But it seems to me confused because there is a preservation of function without accounting for materiality. The word "transform"seems to be apt here. Physical objects are capable of transformation but whether or not the resulting object functions the same will be dependent upon its resulting material constitution. Replace the wood of a wooden table with jell-o and it may have the same general shape as before but it will certainly have very different structural properties. A key aspect of the physical is that the materiality of objects determines its properties so that there can be no change in the materiality of an object without a change to its physical qualities. In relation to the question of uploading, the Theseusians just seem to change the topic.

There is a lot that can be said about the concept of identity, but not much more that needs to be said about it in relation to this question. Because mind uploading as typically understood presupposes preservation of identity but not preservation of physicality, it is in contradiction with physicalism. If a mind is physical, then there can either be transformation or duplication. Since uploading is by definition a change in kind, (from physical to digital/representational), we can rule out duplication. And since the resulting digital state would have none of the original physicality it would have different qualities (if it can be said to have any at all).

In the most complete reading of an "actual" mind uploading scenario, a digital representation of a brain would have been created, and an actual brain destroyed. If then the representation is "wired up" to the world in some way such that it could act as the previous brain had, then we may be tempted to accept that the upload was successful. But we've already made a mistake. It is irrelevant how successful the representation is at behaving like the original brain because we've explicitly destroyed the original making the identity with the digital brain out of the question. For the most generous analysis of uploading, looking past all of the other issues, there is duplication and not preservation of identity. So in this most generous reading, there would be a duplicate mind, but the "you" of before the upload would still persist until destroyed.

I take it that the identity of a physical object is grounded in its physicality and not something abstract like a description, functional or otherwise, that it satisfies. Meaning that it doesn't matter how similar the resulting duplicate mind behaves like you in determining identity any more than two actual twins having similar behavior makes them one person. Similarity doesn't determine identity.

Since on physical grounds uploading doesn't preserve identity, the concept of mind uploading doesn't satisfy its most common implicitly held sense of preservation. You cannot live forever, as yourself, "inside" of a computer. But perhaps your digital mental copy will be grateful for your sacrifice...more realistically though they will probably falsely believe that they just are you and will make peace with the difficulties of identity.Link to something like "Are digital minds possible in principle?"