---
question: What is desire?
elaboration: Within a purely physical framework that doesn't assume non-physical minds, how can we understand desire as something that causally influences the world? If having a desire means relating to a potential world-state, what is the nature of this relationship?
position: Desire is a causal state that represents a possibility that one values being true.
published: false
---

A few matters stand out to me:

1. Desire represents the world as being some way. In cases where we desire that nothing change, we represent things as being the way that we believe them to currently be. In cases where we desire things to be other than they are, we represent them as being that way. Desire entails representation. 

2. Though desire represents, it is distinct from belief in that it additionally represents its conditions as being in some way preferred. This is desire's normative aspect of value: that the represented conditions are in some way better than an alternative. This normative aspect could either be internal to the representation itself (part of its content) or external to it, manifest only in how it motivates action or its 'direction of fit'. 

3. We can often desire things that we believe to be bad for us (e.g., unhealthy foods, toxic relationships). This places desire in potential conflict with belief such that we could desire one thing but believe another. In an important way, much of conscious human experience can be explained by the ever-present tension between our belief and desire.

4. The nature of value and the nature of desire are conceptually intertwined. Understanding one likely illuminates the other.  
5. Desire requires additional beliefs about the world. I can't desire some external object or to act to change some external state, unless i believe there to be this object or for some conditions to currently be present. This sets desire apart from simple stimulus response as it requires an external 


Often when we have a desire, but one not strong enough to drive action, we may express its presence with the term "wish" as if to diminish its causal influence over our actions. 

A point of difficulty for the unique identity of desire from belief is when we consider the very common type of belief about normative matters. For example, it's common to believe that one shouldn't hurt other people or steal from them. This often has nothing to do with a desire for or against some state, but just a belief about what is right or wrong or good or bad. One can also form beliefs about their what their desires are about e.g. I could desire a glass of water and also believe that I should drink water. Or at least it seems this way. But what is the difference between believing that I should drink water and desiring that I drink water? This can be seen as a reason for thinking that the normative force of a desire is external to what the desire represents and is something about how desires causally relate to the rest of one's mind. After all, one can believe that one shouldn't eat a second donut, even while their desire drives them to reach for and joyfully consume that second donut. And often we can lack any additional beliefs about our desires such that we just have a desire and it moves us to act without any reflection on whether or not we should or shouldn't seek to satisfy the desire. If the value was "in the content" it would at least seem unlikely that this would be such a common experience; rather we would expect to always have an expressible belief about our desires, yet this is rarely the case without explicit introspection, again, explaining much of the struggle of being human. 

It seems likely that desire is representation filling a causal role of driving action. But what does it represent? It doesn't seem concerned with truth in the way that belief is. 

I've wondered if desire just is belief but not about the world in the typical way but about what the person having the desire will do. Consider this self-knowledge. If I'm in a donut-filled scenario I believe that I will eat one. Once in that scenario I desire to eat a donut. I've often observed that behaviors that i've fallen into drive a sort of compulsive behavior that I take to be desire. I'll notice that for example, I've had a couple of bites of ice cream after dinner the last few nights in a row and yet again I have a desire to eat ice cream. If I break this habit, I'll find that I forget to desire ice cream after dinner. This at least shows that desire itself is caused; it is not a first mover in this world. This has been a powerful observation in my life that has helped me make better decisions—I'll work on reshaping conditions rather than relying on 'will power'. If one set of conditions trigger an uncontrollable desire, then simply avoid those conditions for a period of time that successfully diminishes the particular desire. This is an incredibly effective strategy. But this doesn't show that desire is predictive behavioral belief, but it does show that desire is in some way brought about by some aspect of regularity sensitivity. 

I've also observed myself initiating certain behaviors where I was aware of no clear desire. An example might be playing with a pen while thinking. I don't desire to play with the pen per se, but just find myself doing it reliably on occasions of deep thinking. This is a kind of compulsion but one without desire. It's likely that something like an associative conditioning explains a lot of cognition even if, and certainly not, all. This is another reason to reject that desire is itself a belief about what one will do. Desire may arise as a matter of association based on prior conditions, but all things which break due to excessive force are not the same kind of object after all. Desire is likely tokened by association, but what about first desires?

We can taste something new for the first time and immediately desire to eat more. This is not obviously a conditioned response. Something about the sensory input caused the desire to form. Often there is sugar or fat in the causal chain of perception. We are likely physiologically structured to both detect these as well as pursuit them. This clearly sets apart activities like donut eating from activities like pen twirling; there is nothing in compulsive behaviors that come with clear physiological explanations and certainly no specific evolutionary explanations within reach. 

So consider a common response:
Why did you do X?
Because I wanted to. 
But why did you want to? 
...

Desire is always part of a larger causal chain. 

Desires are representational states that explain action but don't justify them. That is, they explain the immediate causal link in the larger chain, but in terms of reason or justification for supporting the causal chain, they do nothing. When we look for reasons we look for something of value and how the action in question is in service of the stated value, even if we don't hold the value ourselves we can reason from them to the action. 

I think that people are often confused about what they value and what they think that they should value. In this way I do think that a person can discover what they value through their desires. For example a person may claim to value living without conflict with others and yet never back down from potential altercations. In such a case they may actually beating others than living free of conflict. This isn't to say anything absolute about what is correct, just that there exists a contradiction in such a person. 

But are a persons values distinct from the way that desire moves them or is the very notion of value an abstraction from the various dispositions of a person to act under various conditions? Perhaps to discover that you value X is just to observe that you tend to desire X when conditions are perceived to be related to X. It would be rather strange to say that you value a particular friend while insulting them every time you see them. 

Desire is also one of the hardest things to change about ourselves. We can shape occurrent desire by controlling external conditions, but we can't as easily or at all change which desires that we have in general. if we could, we could decide to derive the same pleasure from vegetables as we do from foods high in fat and sugar.

Desires are also seemingly hierarchical in the way that values are. You might desire losing weight more than you desire to eat a donut at a particular time which causally explains why you don't eat the donut. You may value family time, though you'll neglect them in order to work, not because you value work more but because you value their well-being more than your time with them and money supports just that. This is a point in favor of desires just being values that one holds. Although our desires can often change. We may realize that what we valued before was not what we expected and instead value something else. Some times desire works this way too, but not always. If you desire a donut but then learn that they were poisoned, you will no longer desire the donut.


---


So why do I say that if we understood value, we might also understand desire? Well, for one, it's hard to imagine valuing something in a way that doesn't drive action. For example, if you value living, it's hard to imagine why you wouldn't avoid scenarios in which your life is compromised. Similarly, it's hard to make sense of a scenario in which a person desires something which they explicitly do not value.

Now, I think here we need to be careful and set aside claims that could be false. We often don't know ourselves truly. That is, we may say that we value one thing, but it's just not true, and there's no surprise that the world is full of these types of inconsistent and contradictory people. We are all those people from time to time. So, when we rule out claims and focus only on the fact of the matter as to what a person values, then it becomes less clear that there is a distinction between desire and value.

To value something, we can ask, if there is no desire, why not? There is, of course, the possibility of pathology, so that whatever gives desire its causal force in a mind doesn't obtain, in the way that a domino in a chain of dominoes would start a chain reaction if it weren't glued in place. There is a sense of potentiality that could be frustrated by some blocker. So it's possible that a person, for example, might desire to scratch their nose, but their arms are restrained, not allowing them to realize the action that desire is driving. But that's an explanation of why action could fail. It's not an example of how desire could fail.

If a person values that X be the case, and yet doesn't desire that X be the case, it's unclear what kind of failure this even represents. What makes it true that the person values X if there is no desire that X? We can certainly make sense of claims about what a person ought to desire. For example, as biological creatures, we require water. And so we ought to desire water when we are dehydrated. If a person were to lack a desire for water while they were dehydrated, there is something pathological about that scenario. It seems objectively true that the person ought to desire water. They certainly need water. With this in mind, we could consider water to be valuable to human beings. So we ought to value water in the same way that we ought to desire water. So here again, we see a tight similarity between value and desire. And when there is no desire present when there ought to be, we can see that we ought to also value water, even when we don't. These two concepts don't easily come apart. We have difficulty making sense of a lack of value where there should be value, just as we have difficulty making sense of a lack of desire when there should be desire.

It seems likely to me that desire, in being representational, represents something as being valuable. So that when we desire something, we believe that something is valuable. Now, we can have contradictory beliefs. So you can desire a donut but believe that the donut is not good for you. These are contradictory beliefs, but it's not an impossible physical state to be in. And I think, as I've said before, this is a large part of being human. And a large part of being a productive human is in resolving, or at least seeking to resolve, these contradictions wherever we can.

I think the difference here between belief, which is important to note, is that if I believe it is raining, but I also believe that it is not raining, there is a sense in which I am broken, something is deeply wrong with me, or at least how I represent the world. But the same restriction doesn't seem to apply to desire. I could desire to eat a donut and desire to be as healthy as possible, and while these could lead to contradictory actions, they don't in themselves contradict anything. These are two different possibilities that I value. I value, let's say, the pleasure from eating a donut, or we could say that I value calorically dense foods for survival. And there is just nothing wrong with this. We do need calories to survive. We are just living in a time of abundance, so that we can actually harm ourselves by consuming too many calories. But I can also value being in shape, and these ideas, these possibilities, aren't logically exclusive.

Or I can paint an attempt to find a contradiction and still show there isn't one. For example, let's say that you have to decide which direction to walk. You look to your left, and you feel desire to walk in that direction. But just to be safe, you look to your right, and once again you feel a desire to walk in that direction. Is this a contradiction? Well, you can't walk in both directions, so you will probably experience a hesitation, a stalemate. But you won't be in a state of contradiction. There is a conflict, and you won't make much progress in either direction until you resolve the conflict. But there is no contradiction. Perhaps you value both directions equally, so it really is just a matter of a coin flip. And for many decisions in life, people find that the decisions that they torment themselves over didn't matter as much as they thought it mattered. In other words, it was important to make a decision between the various options, but all of the options were worthy of equal value, or were valued equally, and that what they all shared in common was that they were better than no decision at all. And that what we initially experienced as conflicting desires were just equal desires above no choice at all. Sometimes we simply desire change, because change is what is good for us. And exactly what the next state is, is less important than it is not the same state as what you are currently in.

Common language here can mislead us. We can often say things like, a self-actualized person is the one who brings their desires into alignment with their values. But it's, I think, more accurate to say something like, an actualized person would endeavor to bring their desires in alignment with the values one believes one ought to hold. That is, to attempt to shape one's desires into alignment with the desires one believes one ought to have. Because at the time that one has a desire, one is expressing a value. Perhaps there are two options then. One, if a person has competing desires, they hold competing values. Or two, the competing states are not of values, but of belief and of a desire. That one can believe that one ought to do something else, while nonetheless desiring to do that thing. The belief about what one ought to value is not itself a value. Being moved to make something the case is to value.

In philosophy, this is typically what's called operationalism, to define a term by means of some operation, so that to X is to perform Y, that some concept is identical with some procedure or operation. And in general, I'm not drawn to these types of positions, but for many mental terms, it's, if not convincing, hard to avoid. When it comes to functional concepts, for example, using static concepts will always fail to capture the appropriate idea, and it seems that most mental terms are susceptible to functional analysis. This is why functionalism in the philosophy of mind has been such an influential position.

To expound upon this, it is intuitionally difficult to make sense of the mind that exists outside of time. For all mental events seem to be occurrences. You can think about something, you can experience something, you can feel a certain way about something. These are events that exist within time. And things which occur, which take place in the world, are causal, are physical. So a mental term which picks out such mental events is almost essentially functionally characterisable. So it seems to make sense that to analyse most mental terms would be to seek some sort of function or operation which is identical with that term.

From this, I think it follows that value, or to value, independently of a consideration of causal events, might be to ask something nonsensical. There are things, of course, which are valuable. But when we value those things, correctly or incorrectly, we are relating to them in some way. This way clearly isn't spatial or even temporal. It's not that we are valuing a value by standing to the left of it rather than to the right of it, and it's not like we value something valuable because we exist before it rather than after it. It seems as if we stand in a relation of causality, that we will respond to it in a certain way, that we will be sensitive to its presence in a certain way, that we will avoid it or we will pursue it or we will sustain it or be sustained by it. To value something is to be causally moved by its presence in some way. The relation is one of causal sensitivity. In the same way, if we hate something, we may be moved by its presence to attack it or to avoid it. But what we will not do is ignore it. Be indifferent to it. So if we value something, it seems as if we will be moved by it in some way.

To desire seems to be to be moved by the idea or the representation. It is to have in the mind something like a goal that is worthy of pursuit. It is to be moved by a possibility. So I think my conclusion is that desire is a representation of a way that the world is or could be, and the causal relation to that possibility to pursue it. And like any causal chain, it can be blocked. But up till the point of desire, and without further intervention or inability of some kind, this is the causal relation. It is the intentional equivalent of a ball at the edge of a hill with the potential energy to roll all the way down to the valley below. Desire is potential energy for action. It need not entail action, but left uninhibited it will cause action.

Isn't it interesting that people describe desires in terms of urges? They feel an urge to do something. And I think this is right. It's a welling up of a felt force inside of us to make something the case, to do something. It is motivational, essentially.

Oddly, with these considerations, a person giving the reason for action that they wanted to might not be as absurd as we typically take it to be. For desire is, on my account here, the occurrence of a value. To value X just is to be disposed to desire X. As with other mental states, we don't typically speak of them as inexistent when we don't have an occurrence of them. Like, if we aren't actively believing that we live in a particular city, we don't change the fact that we believe that we are in that city, even though we aren't thinking about it. So we can speak of dispositional beliefs and occurrences of those beliefs. And I think the same holds for values. To have a value is to have the disposition to desire that which is claimed to be valued. And to know that you have a value just is to know that you will desire that thing when that thing is related to you in a way that you could desire it.

So, to value something is to desire something. To value that something be the case is to desire that that something be the case. To desire that something be the case is to value that thing being the case. I can't make sense of the two coming apart without acuity, without reducing one or the other to near meaninglessness.

I offer this account with some hesitation, as it strikes me as incorrect, but I can't yet think myself out of this position. To do so would require an almost platonic, formal idealism, whereby the two come apart in principle, though not in practice. Or to put this more excessively, I think that conceptually we can make a distinction, but I'm not sure if in actuality there is a difference. Oftentimes when it comes to concepts, two related concepts pick out or apply successfully to one and the same object, but cover or emphasize different aspects of that same object. Because of this, we can often tease apart concepts that nonetheless necessarily apply to the same object. I think this in general explains how philosophy can make distinctions where there are no differences. There is a conceptual difference, and that's just what a distinction is. But the distinction is one of emphasis, not of actuality. This isn't necessarily a bad thing, because thinking just is this process of relating to actuality in different ways. So there's nothing wrong with this. It's just that our distinctions in general, at least specifically in philosophy, endeavor to pick out actual differences in the world. So while conceptually we may be able to make a distinction between desire and value, it may be that in actuality there is none.


**2. On Operationalizing Desire and Potential Energy**

> Primarily the part that I struggle with in regards to operationalizing desire is at the level of expression. What I want to express is that desire is causal. It makes a difference in the world, but what I want to avoid is any dependence on non-desire based consequences. It seems that a physical state could be part of many causal chains resulting in very different outcomes, and desire is no different. Some obvious examples would be like requiring desire to bring a person to ascent to a preference, or to choose one world over another world, or some type of expression, but obviously any form of expression could be susceptible to counterexamples, showing that they are not essential to the thing being the thing in question. Desire, like all mental states, can bring about many different behaviors. So requiring one particular behavior over another would be a misstep. And yet, in being a physical state, it must play a causal role in the world. So, if I were to say that desire is a causal state that represents a possibility, actualized or not, that one values being true, there's a sense in which that's on the right track, but it seems causally inert, which is incorrect. It can't be inert. But it also won't work to define these terms interchangeably, so that to desire is to value some possibility being true, unless I say something more about value, other than it is to desire that which is valued. These can't be circularly dependent. This is where I think the analogy to potential energy is informative. A ball resting on the edge of a cliff may never roll down because conditions never obtained that would bring about its downfall. So we can't hold the definition of potential energy to what does take place. After all, there is the word potential here. I think, similarly, there is something like potential action for a desire. The desire could be frustrated for any number of reasons, even if one of those sources of frustration is just a stronger desire. Nonetheless, there is something like potential action that naturally results from the desire if those appropriate conditions obtain. Anger is another state, susceptible to the same analysis. People who are angry are more inclined to have verbal outbursts, though they aren't essential to anger. Anger is like elastic potential energy. It stores the energy that could be released. But if the stretched elastic band isn't released, then the energy is not released. And similarly, the angry person, who either slowly releases or doesn't allow themselves to release the tension, won't have a verbal outburst. Nonetheless, there is truth to the potentiality of the state. Now I'm not quite sure that this physical energy comparison is metaphorical. It may very well be analogous in that desire seems to be a causal state with the potential to make a difference. This would require it to be a state of higher energy than a non-desirous state or a non-cognitive state. There is a motive force in states like desire. They bring about changes. So, metaphorically, they are batteries for change, but perhaps not so metaphorically. Perhaps physiologically speaking, desires are representational states that are in higher energy states poised to make a difference without other blockers. This certainly would resonate with my own intuitions, and, I suspect, many intuitions of others. There is, I think, a strong sense that to desire something is to seek to make it the case, to consent, to assent to the claim, to pick, to decide, to otherwise act in favor of that preference. How specifically it's expressed is contingent upon external conditions, in the same way that potential energy is expressed contingent upon external conditions. What is the constant is that stored aspect of energy. That potentiality is simply to say that the energy is available to be expressed if conditions are obtained.

---

**3. On the Linguistic Distinction Between Desire and Value**

> Now, by identifying desire and value, I don't mean to say that desire is value, but it is value-ing. I think I've been sloppy about that so far, and we'll need to revise that in a future version. To desire is to value. What is valued is or is not valuable, independently of the act of value. Valuing does not establish value, but desiring does establish desire, so there is at least a linguistic difference between the way we use these terms, even if in the objects of reference there is no difference. Something that is desired is desired, whether or not it is objectively desirable. For example, poison is not desirable, but one might falsely desire it. In this way, what is valued is not necessarily valuable even while being valued. Again, we see common intuitions between the application of both concepts. Perhaps the main conceptual difference between the two is when we speak of value, there isn't necessarily a requirement for an accompanying mental state. Something could be valuable even if nobody recognizes it as being so. In contrast, when we speak of something as being desirable, it at first sounds weird to say, though no one has ever desired it. There's no clear contradiction, it's just an uncommon way of speaking. Typically, when we speak of something as being desirable, what we mean to express is that there are people who desire it. But I think this is just a matter of convention, and not one that couldn't be overcome with some clarification. For example, we could easily make a distinction between something being desirable and desired. If desirable entailed people actively desiring it, why would it be that we have a sense that desirable and desired have too subtle meanings? If something is desired, then it follows that there is something which desires it. It's less clear that something being desirable entails actively being desired. In the same way, if something is valued, it entails that something values it. But something being valuable does not. So, again, we can see that we can restore unity between these concepts, even if typical applications of the terms sometimes are a little bit looser than careful scrutiny would assent to.

---

**4. On Belief, Desire, and System-Level Activation**

> Here I think that it's less easy to approach desire as philosophers typically have for belief, in the persistence of a belief, even while not actively being thought about. For example, here's what I mean. If you tend to desire donuts when presented with donuts, it doesn't follow that if currently you are, let's say, reading a book with no thoughts of food, that you desire donut. It's just not true that you have a desire for donuts. Now, it could be true that in general you tend to have desires for donuts, but it's not true of you now that you have a desire for donuts. But if desires are like beliefs and not be a representational, why do beliefs persist while desires do not? And I think the answer is that beliefs don't in themselves drive action. That is, they don't seem to be causal in and of themselves. They can play a causal role in cognition, but this is when they are actively acted upon in some way. Now, this does suggest two observations about the nature of desire. One, perhaps like belief, we do retain them when we are not actively tokening them, but that they are causally inert. And maybe the word value, in the sense of having a value or valuing, is an inert desire. We are disposed to desire the object of value when conditions obtain. But when those conditions don't obtain, that state is inert, and an inert desire is a value. While an occurrent value, a token value, an active value, is desire. This makes quite a bit of sense to me, but it also suggests that desire, when not tokened, when not occurrent, is actually not causally efficacious. The other suggestion that this raises is that a desire might be true of a total mind and not an individual unit of desire. By that I mean that there could be something like a state of desire which could take different representational units. So take the sentence, I desire that X, and the state of desire might be a motive state of your mind, but the content of the desire could be swapped out. This is something like the classic philosophical view of desire as a type of propositional attitude. It is a relation to a certain content, a certain possibility. You desire that X, where X is the exchangeable bit that fills that slot, but the total system has been related to that content in such a way that the causal potentiality is established. The problem that I have with this view is that it does not explain consistency of desire over time. If dispositional desires are one's values, as I'm pondering here, treating the motive mental force of a desire as external to the representational content of a desire doesn't explain any such consistency. So even if the tokening or occurrence of the desire is at the system level, as if it's a active state of the system and not intrinsic to the desire itself, it would still need to be the case that the disposition or the non-token desire has something like a motive force intrinsic to it so that it can be read and so that the system as a whole can express it. So perhaps a desire is distinct from a belief in that a belief has no motive aspect essentially, but they can still be read. If the belief is read, nothing follows, if outside of the context of practical or theoretical reasoning. A desire on the other hand, when read, necessarily triggers a motive force. So it essentially has a different causal power within the mind, even if it doesn't store the energy to express itself essentially. When read, when read correctly, it essentially has a different causal power in the mind than a belief.


---

**5. On Contextual Desire, Predictability, and Advertising**

> It could be that desires are occurrences of our values. And maybe occurrences are context-dependent. So, I can remember times in the past where I had particular desires about specific scenarios that I had never been in before, nor have I been in since. Perhaps at a particular restaurant in a far-off country, I was asked where I would like to sit, and in that moment, on reflection, I had a desire to sit in a particular location. There is really nothing general about that occurrence of a desire. Certainly, it's not like, in general, I value sitting in that part of the restaurant, in that part of the world, at that time of day. But there is something like an expression of a value. Perhaps I value particular views from a table. Perhaps I don't like to have my back to a bunch of people. Perhaps I don't like to be in the center of a room, and would prefer to be on a boundary. The particular desire, then, can be seen as an occurrence of one or many values, and can be very particular, very specific, in a way that explains why desire is distinct from belief, and that occurrences seem to be essential, that one doesn't actively desire something that is not, well, actively desired. This would also explain how we are typically quite good at predicting what people that we know well will do or how they will act. We begin to either implicitly or explicitly develop a sense about what matters to them and in understanding what they value can predict reasonably well how they will behave in particular scenarios. I think this also explains the intuition of how it seems nonsensical to say that someone desires what they don't value, or that they don't desire what they do value, though conceptually they seem to come apart. When we apply them to real world scenarios, we have a felt sense of contradiction, because a desire occurring if not related to a value, seemingly has no cause, and nothing ultimately causes itself in our world. I think this also explains how it is that we come to know what we value through what desires we experience. If there were no connection to these deeper values and our transient desires, this could not be the case. In those moments where we desire, say, friendship over money, we learn that what matters most to us are relationships and not wealth. We often learn that we made the wrong choice when the satisfied desire is outweighed by the unsatisfied competing desire, when the lack overpowers the satisfaction. In these cases we learn that one value was actually greater than the other Or even that the action taken was the wrong one for the value at hand. Consider the success of advertising. Often a product is portrayed within a scenario that is of typical human value, like perhaps beer or alcohol, shown in a setting with lots of friends smiling and laughing. Perhaps we desire to be accepted socially and to enjoy the company of our friends and family, but we confuse that or are misled to believe that the beverage or the cigarette is what causes that satisfaction of desire. Phrases like, I thought it would make me happy, but it didn't, are often explained by believing falsely that a particular action would satisfy a particular desire, and having fulfilled the action, but having the desire left unsatisfied, reveals to us that we were wrong. This is possibly evidence that what I said before about the identity between valuing and desiring is potentially incorrect. It could be that something that we value requires an inference to token a desire. So if I value being hydrated and I desire Coca-Cola and perhaps find that it doesn't satisfy my thirst and instead learn that I should have desired water, I will find that when I have that feeling again of dehydration, I will now come to desire water over a syrupy cola. So there was an inference that was wrong or suboptimal in some way. But there remains something like a consistent value of being hydrated.

---

**6. On Inference, Motive Force, and Aging**

> Still, it could be that the motive force of an occurrent desire derives from the underlying value. It's, I think, still the case that the observations I made about the relations between value and desire hold. It is seemingly nonsensical to say that that which you desire, you do not value. So there is something like a value attached to the content of desire. It's as if perhaps there is an inference that some condition or some optional action or state of the world is a satisfaction or would be, if realized, a satisfaction of a value. But that, undeniably, is an inference. So if I am dehydrated and I experience thirst, and I have in front of me three containers of which I cannot tell what type of liquids are inside, I'll have to try them. And so my desire, or I should say my value to be hydrated, and my thirst for something leads to the inference that one of these cans could satisfy my thirst, my desire for liquid. Now, it could turn out that each is actually filled with sand, so I was wrong about there being fluid in there. So the motive force behind the action of trying each can doesn't come from my knowing that there was liquid in the cans, simply that things like those containers often contain liquid, was the inference that attached to my value, that token the desire to drink from the cans. This could explain the success of advertising. Perhaps marketers suggest an inference. Hey, maybe this is what makes people happy. And we observe it and perhaps accept the suggestion. This is enough to token the desire for the beverage or the cigarette. That this is a way to satisfy the value provides the content for the token's desire, but the motive force comes from the underlying value. And we may not know what that underlying value is. In fact, there seems to be no clear way of knowing this directly. We have to infer through our desires and resulting satisfaction or dissatisfaction to the underlying values. So value plus inference gives rise to desire. Satisfaction gives rise to satisfaction. From desire, we can infer underlying value. How else could we make sense of a satisfied desire, leaving us with a felt sense of dissatisfaction? It's also often noticed that as we get older, we make better decisions. With more knowledge and perhaps more skill at thinking, we infer to better possibilities that value can attach to, to create desire. The inference being that this possibility would bring us satisfaction, that is, something that we value would be achieved if those conditions obtained or remained, let's say.

---
### Intentions
And what about intentions? We often form intentions that clearly don't seem to be desires. One may intend to wake up early and head into work while having no desires to do any such things. Intentions feel different. We don't typically confuse them for desire. 

And yet...

Is that right? If I desire ice cream that doesn't mean that I desire to walk to the fridge, or to hold a spoon. Perhaps I really don't want to get off of the couch to get the ice cream; maybe I'm watching a movie and would enjoy some ice cream too but I don't want to pause the movie. If I find the challenge worth the effort, I'll form the intention to do the work required to satisfy the desire for ice cream. In this way it begins to seem like the intentions are needed to explain how desires can come to be satisfied. If I simply had the desire for ice cream but no intention to satisfy it, what then? What is the nature of a desire without the intention to satisfy it? What of the causal potentiality of desire? It looks as if the intention is what makes the actual causal difference. 

It does seem like we often contemplate a desire prior to forming an intention. Often the most outlandish ambitions start out as desires that we first see as pointless because impossible but upon more entertaining begin to cause the formation of intentions. We begin to conceive of ways to satisfy the desire and when we see how to move forward and decide to do so we have formed the required intentions. Perhaps the desire to be rich, causes the formation of the intention to overwork or and give up one's youth. We call this "ambition" but really it might be elaborate intentions produced by a deep desire for more than one has or can have for some time if ever. 

So while intentions may not be desires it seems likely that they are produced by desires as the means by which to satisfy themselves—to make true the possibility that they represent. 

#### Orphaned intentions
I have had the experience of feeling obligated to doing a task that I no longer remember the reason for completing. Perhaps I had to push past a lack of desire and force myself to do something over a period of time and the only way that I could do it was by ignoring the doubt and constant questioning. This works for a time but this can produce scenarios where a task or habit has outlived its purpose and in such cases we can seemingly be doing something with out reason. 

#### Obligations 
Similarly to the orphaned intentions we often do things out of obligation. Clearly when we act to satisfy an obligation we do so with intention. But what about desire? Do we desire to fulfill our obligations or do we merely intend to to do so?


## Putting it together

Motivation to act comes in flavors and degrees of intensity. By flavors, I mean that they seem to be experienced differently. A strong, passionate desire versus passing motivation to a more functional intention to a sort of deep, obligatory action to satisfy a commitment, even while dreading doing so. These are all motivationally driven acts that feel quite different and are expressed with different degrees of force.It's easy to think of a passionate motive force like lust as desire, and trickier, if not impossible, to think of obligatory actions as desire. And yet, there is this pre-action, intentional state that drives the resulting behavior.And yet, at the same time, it doesn't seem possible to cleanly separate each of these motivational states as distinct entities. And often there is a requirement for all of these types of motivation, even for each individually in isolation. For example, if I desire ice cream while watching a movie, I may not desire to stop watching the movie and to get up and go to the kitchen. But my desire for ice cream requires that I form an intention to pause the movie and get up and walk to the kitchen. So I have to form additional intentions in order to satisfy the desire. There are very few simple desires which are satisfied with one action. Usually there are sequences. Human behavior is complex and requires hundreds if not thousands of individual intentional actions. Similarly, if I act from obligation, I probably have some foundational desire of wanting to stay in good social standing to the person I've committed to. Or that I want to achieve something which the obligation is in service of. So it's not clear to me that we can ever get away from desire when we're speaking of obligation. Or get away from intention when we're speaking about desire. So while philosophers have historically tried to conceptually isolate these and other mental conative states, it's not clear to me that this is successful. There is a confluence of these matters wrapped up in all intentional behavior.

Philosophical accounts that focus on pure intention or obligation without reliance on desire are suspicious to me. They often discount the initial formation of the obligation, or the initial creation of the intention, as if these are just things that stand alone.But these strategies often neglect the everyday accessible fact that we obligate ourselves to tasks and to ourselves and to others because of something that we initially desired.And even in cases where there is a culture of inherited obligation, where one is born into some type of social structure, there must be a moment where an individual takes on the responsibility that exists around them. They have to buy in, as it were, accepting the external requirements of their environment, and in doing so, obligating themselves.For many people, the subjective experience of this buy-in is usually expressed with phrases like "wanting to fit in" or a "sense of belonging". In these very real everyday scenarios, I believe what is going on is that in our desire to be accepted, we form intentions to satisfy the external requirements of our environment, and in doing so, obligate ourselves. The desire to belong is an expression of our value, our valuing being a member of the social structure. And I think this is valuable. I think we are social creatures, and this is probably a proper functioning of desire to express this value in the form of the intention to satisfy the requirements of our social environment.So even here, in purely obligatory scenarios, we can't get away from desire as the expression of a value or the instantiation of an occurrent value. Without desire, there could be no obligation. And without intentions, there could be no satisfaction of a desire. These are seemingly all aspects of one motive process, present with all intentional action. And since this motive process can be expanded or shrunk, it invites confusion about the nature of this process. When a desire can quickly be satisfied, we are invited to consider desire as distinct from obligation. But when a life of obligation represents one long desire, intention, obligation, satisfaction instance, it's harder to see the action resulting from desire. A person may decide when they're six years old to join the church, for example, and live a life of service. Their entire life will then be a result of that initial buy-in. And so it will seem quite different from a quick, passionate satisfaction of a desire. And yet, I do believe there is reason to accept that these are one in the same processes, one just much longer than the other.

I think an essential feature of this value-desire relationship is that people seemingly do the exact same things, but for different reasons. One person may, let's say, join a church because they seek what they perceive to be potentially true, and another joins because they seek community. The action is the same, and the resulting habits may appear the same on the outside, but each person's behavior satisfies different intentions in service of different values. And similarly, two people could do different things, but for the same reason. One person born into a community that is deeply engaged with motorsports will work on cars and buy motorcycles and engage in races on the weekends, while another person joins a religious community and engages in prayer and singing hymns. But at the core, both individuals are driven by a value for community.I haven't yet come across a philosophical account of value, desire, intention, or obligation that accounts for this aspect of agency.If we see desire as the occurrence of a value plus inferential content, we get an explanation for why people with the same values can be driven to different actions based on different external environments. An inferential cognitive capacity paired with a value will lead to different desires within different contexts.Different desires will cause different intentions to form, and they will drive different actions. And we are each able to reason about each other's actions because we can perform the same cognitive tasks, just replacing our own values with what we observe to be the values of others, or with their stated values, and reason to the actions that they take.It seems to be the same process by which we understand ourselves that we can come to understand others. We abduct from an action to what intention that could satisfy, and then from that intention to what desire could be satisfied by that intention. And we can go even further to what core value that person must hold in order to justify the observed action. 

So I think this inferential aspect of desire is a crucial insight here. We are often wrong about what will leave us contented. We are often wrong about what will satiate us. Desires are often accessible to introspection. We can know what it is that we desire, but we're often wrong about how the resulting actions will leave us feeling. So we desire that X, and then we make X the case with action, but then we don't feel satisfied.This is undeniably a frequent experience of the human condition.This apparent disconnect between desire and satisfaction is difficult to make sense of on classic Humean views of desire and belief accounts of action. But I think what I'm proposing here makes quick work of the challenge.The content of a desire is the product of inference, from a value to conditions that would be valued if they obtained, and if the resulting conditions obtain and there is satisfaction of that value, then one experiences satisfaction. But this is not a result of satisfying the desire. It's a result of satisfying the value that the desire aimed to satisfy. The disconnect is made possible by the inferential content of the desire. This explains sentences like "discovering what truly matters to us." When we encounter and perceive conditions that are valuable to us, we value them. And once we enter into this state of valuing, we can form desires to seek out these conditions in the future, or to seek out the maintenance of these conditions so that they do not go away. In this way, we do discover what we value. But this relationship doesn't guarantee that we know how to do this. And perhaps sometimes we are wrong about which aspects of our environment are valuable. And so we infer that certain aspects might be the cause of the sense of satisfaction. That is, the perception of value. And I think that's probably what satisfaction is, a perception of value.The purely physical explanation of pleasure or satisfaction as a dopamine hit misses the point here. I don't think that we seek dopamine. I think dopamine is caused by the recognition of the satisfaction of a value. It is the feedback that this is right, this is correct. you. This is where pleasure-based accounts of motivation go wrong. Ego-driven accounts of motivation fail to recognize the potential for error. We can, of course, experience a sense of satisfaction which then evaporates upon learning more details about the truth of consequences. Sometimes this experience is quite jarring. We could feel flushed. Our heart skips a beat. We are completely paralyzed with shock. A moment of intense pleasure can turn to this intense moment of terror and shock within a heartbeat. It happens as quickly as any perception, seemingly immediately present and impactful upon us. Even before we fully grasp the breadth of a scenario, we feel, we perceive that something is wrong. In this way, pleasure is confirmatory, but it is not justificatory. If the value was not truly satisfied, then the pleasure no longer matters. The importance is placed solely on the value that justifies the action that the intention caused by the desire was in service of.

Consider adolescence and the aimlessness that is so almost essential to that phase of human life. We don't know what we want from life. We don't know what we want to do. We feel lost. We feel a sense of rejection of certain aspects of life. We feel a sense of dissatisfaction in general. It's as if we are systems of value, unable to latch on to any particular way of finding or making value in the world just yet. But then for most of us, we experience something, we see something, we do something, we're introduced to something in life that we find ourselves valuing. We latch on to this and often it becomes part of our self-identity. We have effectively discovered what we value. And sometimes we then engage with these activities only to discover that they weren't really making us happy. Something else about those activities were making us happy, or something else about our environment made us happy. Perhaps it wasn't what we were doing, but who we were doing it with. That is what truly made us happy. This is the process of inference that plays out for all of us in life and throughout life. Desires are little inferential acts about what we will perceive as valuable. They cause intentions to form, to change the world, to make those conditions obtain, and then we perceive whether or not we value the outcome. And if we don't value the outcome, we infer differently next time. We desire different things. So the causal flow is value causes plus inferential cognitive processes, desire. Desire has the value component and the inferential content. The desire causes the formation of the intention. The intention represents the world in a certain way as being caused by a certain action, the intention causes the behavior, which is characterized as action and intentional behavior. If the action is performed in the way that the intention describes and the outcome is the way the intention represents the action bringing the world into being, the intention is satisfied as follows John Searle's account of intentional action. But then if we don't experience a sense of satisfaction, even though the intention was satisfied, we then question whether or not the desire was correct in ascribing the action as one that would be perceived as valuable. We learn that what we thought mattered didn't matter. Or we learn that, yes, what I thought mattered does in fact matter, my desire was good. But we use our felt sense of satisfaction as a subjective guide on this to discover what it is that are our core values that drive us, that move us in action, that motive force that we don't have introspective access to directly.

I should say more about this inferential content, because I think most of us aren't conscious of the process of desire formulation. We just feel desire arising inside of us. We experience the desiring of something. We don't decide to desire. And yet, what we learn about ourselves and the world does seem to modify our desires. So acquiring new experiences and learning new things about ourselves and the world does give us a sense of agency over what we desire, even if we can't directly change what we desire. We can also, as I've said earlier, endeavor to change our environment to modulate which desires arise in us. In this way, we also seemingly have agency over our desires. If we know that something we tend to desire produces outcomes that aren't beneficial to us, we can avoid those environments to avoid the arising of those desires. And as most people have observed, over time, these conditions themselves become less capable of bringing about those desires in us.And the inverse is also true, where if we lack a desire that we believe we ought to have, we can condition ourselves to behave in a certain way within that environment, and soon we find the desire to do so beginning to arise automatically. I think this raises the question as to why desires can be in conflict with our beliefs. Why we can believe that having a desire would be good, and yet we don't have it. And when we believe that a desire is bad, it arises in us automatically. This is a deep tension. As I've said already, I believe this to be a core aspect of the human condition. It explains much of what it means to be human. The ancient metaphor of the rider and the elephant seems quite apt here. Most of us have a sense of dual identity, where we can think about ourselves objectively, but then have a subjective experience that rationally conflicts with that objective sense. We can think of this as our higher-order executive functions and our lizard brain in conflict, or however popular literature attempts to characterize it. But there is a felt sense that there's a grain of truth to these metaphors.

Let me consider two types of people. The first is the person who reasons strongly and tempers their actions to be in accordance with their rational beliefs, even when in conflict of desire. This person, we could say, doesn't follow their desires, but follows only what they can rationally reason about. The second person is the inverse. They are able to reason, but they generally follow their immediate desires. Now, I could say more about the second person, but what we will find is that I cannot say more about them without saying more about the first person. For example, if the second person knows what they should do because they're capable of reasoning, and yet they follow the whims of their desires, they will undoubtedly become aware of an internal conflict. But this is necessarily higher-order beliefs, meta-beliefs about their motivations. But I simply set out to talk about the person and how they are motivated to action, and I am unavoidably brought to higher-order representations of first-order states. The first person, driven by higher-order reason, is, in a sense, bypassing their first-order desires in order to maintain this rational consistency. And the second person is not overriding their first-order desires. But I can't even characterize this distinction without introducing a higher-order level of representation. So seemingly, I can't even characterize the difference between these two types of people without bringing in the ancient metaphor between first order and higher order, or animal and rider. That is, I can't do so without introducing a second motive origin, one driven by reason alone, but I am not aware of any philosophical counts of non-cognitive force when it comes to action. All accounts rely on some form of desire to motivate action. So even for the first person who can reason about, let's say, their obligations and then act in accordance with their discovered obligations, we must still say something about what they desire. And it could be as simple as that they desire social acceptance, they desire to belong. Or it could be something as abstract or broad as they desire to be rational. Whatever that value is, whether we can know it or not, for any given person, there must be something of which that higher order reasoning satisfies which the low level cannot or does not. And I think most of us have known people like this who seem unhappy. They do what they think is right. They live a life of service and obligation. They don't follow the whim of their desires, and they seem miserable. And we all know people who seem to be like leaves in the wind, following every whim of desire that arises in them, and their euphoric joy, and often torturous lows. But they last only as long as the absence of the next desire to chase. Often the former we see in the religious zealots who live by a code and are taught to and learn to deny their flesh or their base drives. And the latter we see in different groups and individuals who cast off the constraints of establishment, like the hippies and other cults who seek only what feels self-satisfying, self-gratifying, and self-confirming. And I think the average person has the sense that both of these extremes fail in some way, that both represent failures of a kind.

I think the truth of the matter is probably that, if we think of these as two types of system, they're meant to work together. That is, they almost certainly evolved together, and it may not even be distinct systems, but two ways of representing one and the same system, or two sides of the same coin. After all, if, as I say, desires have inferential content, then some inferential process, some inherently cognitive process, must bring them about. And yet, that type of process just is this higher-order, second-order rational system. So they can't be of essentially different kinds. There is a related problem, independent of the topic of desire and the matter of mentality generally, and that is to ask something about the nature of logic itself. Why is it that one ought to move from premises to conclusions in a valid argument? Why is it that one ought not accept a contradiction? Why should one accept the law of non-contradiction? These are unanswered in logic itself. These are axioms which establish logic, but they do not operate within logic. They are essentially like the rules of chess that constitute the game. They are not rules from withinside the game of chess that we can justify. Rationality, as thoughts that are logically structured, are rational insofar as they comply with the laws of logic. So, in thought, it's not that it is logical to accept a conclusion entailed by premises. It is rational, because that movement complies with or conforms to the dictates of logic. simply picks out the validity of the structure in common language. For there to be a true conflict between desire and higher-order rationality, we would need to show that this first-order, lower-order, animal process is inherently irrational. And the problem is, despite what we often hear from popular media, this does not seem to be the case at all. If a desire repeatedly arises that satisfies, that provides positive feedback, that reinforces future occurrences of the desire, this is quite rational. If what moves one in action is a value, and the consequences of a successful action satisfy the conditions of the perception of that value, then the reoccurrence of the desire is rational, and that it conforms to the dictates of logic. It doesn't answer Hume's guillotine, but nothing within logic can do that. It simply says that if one of the premises is a value, and some action will bring about the conditions picked out or would be perceived as valuable, then one ought to take that action. And that is essentially the content of a desire. One can desire those conditions, or one can desire taking an action. The content need only be some possible or actual state of the world that is inferentially concluded to satisfy the value premise. Basically, if one would perceive X as valuable if X were to occur, and one observes Y as a way to bring about X, or the conditions under which X would obtain, then the inferential content of the desire is that Y. We may not be conscious of just what X is, but we are conscious of the desire, that Y. And we learn about X by observing many instances of the desire, that Y, to see if Y in fact does bring about the perception of value.

I think this explains the potential disconnect between the first type of person above and the second type of person. The first type of person will reason by some framework external to their own values. They will think about from some other perspective, like a particular religion, what is right, what is good, and they will bypass their motive system to do what is what they perceive to be right, regardless of their internal experiences of satisfaction. But this could only be possible if they could tap into that motive force, whatever it may be. And I don't know how to characterize that without saying that they desire to do what is right, or they desire to do what is true, or they desire to do what is best for those that they love. I am not aware of how to formulate such a mindset of duty without grounding it in something like love. And I cannot make sense of a concept like love without the concept of value. And so I returned to a claim earlier in this article, where I said that I do not believe that we can make sense of desire without an understanding of value, and that if we understood value, I think we would also understand desire.

It is seemingly a universal realization of humanity, insensitive to the particularities of any culture, that what ultimately matters is love. But then each culture and each individual seemingly responds to this realization in very different ways, because I believe this is the inferential gap between value and action, that the role of desire functionally fills.

Hume's guillotine is not directed at this gap. It is directed at the value itself as a premise in these implicit arguments that drive behavior. But it also is targeted at the dictates of logic. Nothing within logic justifies the tenets of logic. This misunderstanding has driven scientifically-minded people to cast off the study of ethics in favor of objective truth, while ignoring the obvious problem that it also undermines their value of objective truth. How do we justify valuing it over, say, pure utility, insensitive to truth, or to value utility at all? Why should we not value the stillness of a tree as the epitome of existence? Who could stand still for the longest? Perhaps this is the greatest virtue. Well, nobody can say, because within the experience of life is the implicit assumption of value, not a rational argument to the conclusion that we ought to value. I think it follows from this that consciousness essentially grounds value. Not what is valuable, but that what we value is grounded in the fact that we are aware of the requirements of our nature. Desire arises as an inferential inclination to act, but it is our awareness of desire that can veto the inference. This is the origin of the felt sense of conflict within. Before the awareness, there is simply an impulse, a causal receptivity to certain external conditions. Once we are aware of the impulse, the default causal connection of our nature, we become aware of the desire as an indication of value, and its satisfaction as justification of the premise that that is what we value.


The inferential nature of desire proposed here could explain the associative nature explored earlier, why certain conditions can give rise to these desires suddenly and seemingly from nowhere.If desires are inferential, as I propose, then it would make sense that given the current context and the latent value, the desire represents an inference as to what would satisfy one's values. These would take the current conditions and infer to a certain action or certain conditions that satisfy one's values. Desire's latent inferential aspect would explain the way in which they seemingly suddenly arise given certain contexts. This account would also explain various ways of overcoming addiction. Often people will try to avoid or fight directly a desire, when typically avoiding certain conditions is more successful. However, more therapeutic approaches typically expose people to those conditions under certain controls that can then condition them out of that desire. So certain fears, certain phobias are quite susceptible to this type of therapeutic conditioning. But also certain addictions where somebody is exposed to the negative consequences of their desires can similarly decondition their automatic arising desires. Addicts often report that seeing firsthand how their choices have impacted those that they love suddenly becomes enough to evaporate their desires. They instantly resolve to no longer do whatever it was that they had been doing that hurt those that they love. It's hard to account for scenarios like these without proposing an inferential nature to desire. At some point it becomes obvious that certain conditions or courses of actions are not in one's best interests. And it's not the same as believing a proposition that, say, a drug is bad for you. You have to know that it's bad for you. It has to be a case that the inference that the drug will satisfy a value is no longer justified. What this doesn't explain, however, is the divide between higher-order inferences and whatever the nature of these first-order desire inferences are. Why can we seemingly realize something objectively that subjective desire lags behind? I'm tempted to embrace a divide between these two processes. Again, like the classic writer and elephant metaphor. But I think there's also a chance that the lower process of inference is right. There is often truth in the fact that the addiction or the desire that one has reason not to indulge in is inferred, is generated, because it really is a way to satisfy a value, and that is the kind of person that the individual is, even if, rationally, they value a different description of themselves. I think that this is the nature of value. We often have competing values, and if I'm right, that these values ground motive, cognitive states, then it would follow that there would be conflicting desires and internal conflict. the proving ground that determines just what kind of a person each of us is. Unlike less complex life, where it is doomed to behave exactly as one is wired, we have the ability to overrule our base desires and reason to better action. We experience this as in a conflict, but it produces change within a single member of a species rather than requiring slow evolutionary change over many generations. It is a tremendous strength, but it is also effortful.