# The Misunderstood Nature of Genius
Genius is often attributed to those with accomplishments that exceed their contemporaries. But it’s not hard to find cases of great skill where the attribution of genius feels strained. If a craftsman makes a better tool of some kind than another person, we may be impressed, but it seems to take something more for them to ascend to “genius” status. An additional backstory of the craftsman’s life can change this. When we learn about the years of study, observation, and discovery, the “genius” begins to emerge. I think this shows that conceptually there is a mental component to “genius” that is independent of skill. Skill can certainly be an expression of genius, but I think there is a more reliable target for the concept of genius: Interest. 
## Being successfully average
A well-rounded person must balance interests ranging from basic health needs like nutrition to social needs for friendship. A life is constituted of these action-guiding interests, and for a person well-suited to their environment, interests will track what is beneficial to their continued existence. The objective nature of this interest-environment fit has the consequence of leaving people in similar environments being very similar; very successfully... average. 

But then there are people who either lack or deny general interests to an abnormal degree, in favor of a narrow range of more intense interests. Sometimes these interests are externally or ideologically imposed, but often they are internal to the person driving them from within. In the way that a loud distant explosion will grab your attention, a genius will be drawn to a topic that the average person might take note of but then soon return to their interest-balanced average life. 
## Attention
Sometimes it doesn’t take much attention to notice what others have missed, but it always takes at least some attention. The application of attention is an expression of interest. If one attends to a problem long enough and has the required mental ability, one will notice what others have missed. Of course there is always an element of chance involved in that one might just by chance be the first person to attend to just the right area for insight. But success by chance is better at creating ego-maniacs than geniuses. Those who attend for the longest, tend to notice the most. Still, there is an undeniable aspect of “mental ability” that contributes. 
## Mental ability
There is an aspect of mental ability that seems to get conflated with skill. I’m not sure how to think about this. Clearly there are ways to think about thinking that can improve the quality of thought, but taking that as evidence that mental ability is a skill quickly becomes circular. Skills can be developed intentionally, but thinking is not something that we think about doing per se. Sure we can think about thinking, but thinking, unlike intentional action, is not produced by first thinking about doing so. There is a sense in which we can guide thought by intending to attend to a particular topic and actively ignoring thought of others, but the need to focus in this way only goes to show how thought *arises*, as it were. Mental “ability” then is probably better denoted by mental “capacity”.

If a person is naturally irrational they will lack the capacity to grasp logical relations. Lacking the capacity for rational thought would certainly be detrimental to one’s survival. But beyond that, it seems to me that mental capacity is not a large factor for the concept of genius. 

Perhaps a person with poor memory finds it difficult to keep all of the factors of a problem in mind at the same time despite their above average level of interest in the topic at hand. This would seem to be a deficiency in mental capacity limiting their status as genius. 