Desire in the best cases drive us towards conditions that benefit our continued existence. More can certainly be said, but this much is easy to argue for. But this places the entirity of possible value of desire within the existence of the things that have them. Once a thing is dead, it doesn't make much sense to say that the corpse should desire to move out of danger, or should desire to drink water, eat food, or whatever else the thing used to require in order to continue existing. Once a thing is no longer living and for all things that have never lived, there seems to no longer be requirements such t:what desire could provide value even if it made sense for such things to have desires.

Desire is often the way that we come to learn what we value. It could be that desire is a sense like sight or smell, where instead of perceiving light or odor, we perceive values. If that sounds strange at first, consider how thirst is a desire for water. Now consider the statement that the “value of water is based in your desire”. That seems clearly false. The value of water is surely indifferent to one’s desires. But how is this desire truly different in nature? In other ways, we are some times not aware of the value of certain things and so don’t desire them in the way that a color blind person may not perceive a certain color that is present. Other times we are wrong about the value of a thing when we nonetheless desire it. It would be nice if our desires were identical to our knowledge of value, but this sadly isn’t so. We can know that something is bad for us, yet still desire it deeply. And we can know that something is good for us, but lack any desire for it. This is how perception works. You can know that you’re looking at an optical illusion and know that you can’t believe what you see, while nonetheless still seeing what you see. Perception is another area where popular thought seems to have accepted the idea that we construct the world in our heads. There is usually some form of gesturing towards cases of sensory illusion as reason to believe that we just construct reality in our heads. But just as we can’t make sense of veridical perceptions without appeal to a shared reality, I don’t think we can make sense of shared desires without appeal to a shared reality. 

It would be quite strange to say of something or someone that you do not want it or to be around them and yet proclaim that you value it or them. We may not desire something directly, but value some consequence of a thing and so desire its posession. In these cases our desire for one thing is derived from another thing which desire directly. In this way, we often ground what we value in desire. But, if value is derived from desire but desire itself is only valuable within life, then value would seem to be subjective. 

But this seems wrong to me. We can easily make sense of value where there is no desire. Perhaps a person doesn't desire to eat healthy food and yet nonetheles such food would be beneficial to the person. It makes perfect sense to say that the type of nutrients that a body would benefit from are valuable to it whether or not they are desired. In fact, I would argue, that much of human existence if not all existence, is wrapped up in discovering what is valuable to and for us and calibrating our behavior to reflect these objective values. 

If this is right, then knowledge of these objective values is essential to successfull existence. And yet, we don't often reason our way to such knowledge but instead take our desires as indications of what we ought to value. This is problematic though as we don't often decide to desire what we desire. It's not clear that we ever have the ability to decide to desire. At best, we can aim to condition ourselves to desire what we reason to be good for us, but the limits to this strategy are unclear if this strategy works at all.

What if a desire arises in you that you have reason not to satisfy? Let's say that you have knowledge of a value and can clearly see that your desire is at odds with this value such that the satisfaction of it would be to your detriment. Most of us can relate to this conflict as an essential part of human life, but those with addictions understand just how divided existence can be. Clearly then, desire does not ground value, otherwise such cases would present no difficulty for us, and yet, they present tremendous struggles for us. At best then, it would seem, that desire is an indication of value that can like all indications be wrong at times. 

This leads me to the main thought that I've been tracking. If one can learn to overcome the illusion of the infalibility of desire that most people are initially tricked by, there seems to be a residual problem waiting for them. There are many desires that I no longer let guide me and my life is clearly much better for, and yet, there remains in me a sense of loss. 

Consider a mundane desire for a donut. A life without donuts would be much healthier (perhaps) and so health & fitness fanatics tend to avoid them. And yet, even the most extreme of us in this regard will on occassion "treat" themselves. Why is that? If they have a reason to void them—that is, it is valuable to eat other things instead—how are we to analyze these "treats"? I'm not saying that it's not easy to rationalize a "balanced" life, but rather pointing out that clearly it is common for a person to feel as though they are "missing out" on the satisfaction of the desires that they refrain from satisfying—which they have reason to refrain from satisfying. Here we see an indication that the illusion of the infalibility of desire hasn't been overcome but has merely been dormant. 

Again, and I can't stress this enough, my point has nothing to do with "balance" or any other type of rationalization of what is "acceptable" or "evens out" or any other ways of justifying a particular way of life. My point is that most of us learn not to seek the satisfaction of every desire that arises in us and yet retain a sense of loss by the missing satisfaction. If value is not grounded in desire, but is objective and prior to desire as it must be if we are to make sense of the evolution of desire, then there is no loss in the frustration of those desires which falsely indicate what is valuable to and for us. This sense of loss is like the aftershock of desire. Just as an aftershock is just another earthquake I suspect that this sense of loss is something like a desire to satisfy desire. It's a meta-desire. 

If this is right, the illusion of desire is even stronger than it initially appears. Some examples of thoughts caused by or justified by the sense of loss are expressable with sentences such as "the satisfaction of desire makes for a happy life", "I would be a miseraable person if I never enjoyed myself", "Sure you'd be healthier without X, but what kind of a life is that?", etc. The general content of these thoughts is something along the lines that happiness is grounded in satisfaction of desire. So while one might overcome the illusion of the infalibility of desire, there awaits an implicit identiy claim between happiness and satisfaction.

And yet, independently, most people also eventually learn that what "feels good" isn't always what makes one happy. For as long as even just one case of satisfaction of desire fails to make one happy, the identity claim is false. This means that the sense of loss aftershock is itself too an illusion, but this time, of identity. Many scenarios bring about happiness in people, most of them quite far from the satisfaction of desire. Consider appreciation, for example, where you find yourself in a moment appreciating a person who is in your life and how this thought brings you great joy. It's quite common to hear reports of the most durable instances of happiness arising other non-desirous like this. 

To be clear, one might desire to have a life of appreciation and the issue would remain the same. Happiness is not identical with the satisfaction of desire, but is a state of being independent of it. I suspect that happiness too is an indication that can be wrong. Many foolish people experience happiness at the pique of their folly. I don't think this should be denied by claiming that it's not "real" happiness or some such strategy. I suspect that there are few if any infallible subjective mental states. But that's a larger problem outside of my current scope. 

It seems that it is at least very hard to escape the illusion of the infalibility of desire for even if we can decide to avoid the satisfaction of some on the basis of reason, we will still feel that our happiness could have been greater had the desire been satisfied. It could very well be that this illusion is essential to life. To be alive is to be driven by one's nature regardless of the correctness of those innate desires. In a sense each instance of a thing is a commitment to a unique strategy in the pursuit of optimimal behavior. Perhaps our level of cognitive development introduces the tension mentioned above in that with the aide of reason, one no longer needs to rely on chance but can instead reason to objective value. This ability may place us at odds with out nature and we just might be out of luck: be moved by objective value and flourish but miss out on satisfaction, or be guided by desire, enjoy our earned satisfaction, but suffer the objective consequences. 
