---
type: 'blog'
path: "/blog/desire-produces-enjoyment"
title: "Which came first, the desire or the pleasure?"
subtitle: "How to optimize for pleasure while limiting the consequences"
summary: "An exploration of desire and how best to approach indulging in the things in life that we deeply desire but which also produce negative outcomes that we wish to limit. It actually concludes with some useful (for me, and maybe for you) life advice."
date: "2018-03-21"
published: false
---
When I arrive at a scheduled day of food indulgence—the now ubiquitous cheat day—I often find myself free of withheld desire. All week I struggle with [my self(s)](https://www.joshuaheiland.com/blog/theory-of-self) over instant gratification versus my long term health, just to have my victory rewarded with a numbing slap in the face. Take my love of a well-made, or even poorly-made, pastry for example. All week I work from various cafes and am confronted with an assortment of tasty treats which I diligently though painfully ignore. Then the cheat day comes. I order a pastry; I sit down with the pastry; I hold the pastry; I bite the pastry; The pastry is tasty, but the pleasure pales in comparison to the intense unsatisfied desire of the previous moments of restraint. I certainly possess the capacity for intense pastry desire, but for whatever reason it escapes me at this moment. This is quite the dilemma—now that I can have, I do not really want. This shows something unintuitive about the relationship between desire and pleasure that I wish to explore.

I can't deny the obvious fact that the pleasure I am capable of experiencing can't be provided by the pastry itself. If pleasure was an intrinsic pastry quality, I would always experience it without fail when eating a pastry. Enjoyment must therefore be created by my own brain in response to the pastry. I can assume that since the brain is a complex system that there are an infinite number of unique states that can arise. So I believe I can say without much reaching that pleasure must be a possible experience that emerges from certain states of the brain paired with certain types of environments.

I can make a few additional observations about desire:
1. When I most want, I most enjoy.
2. Some delay between initial desire and indulging can magnify desire.
3. Though, intensity of desire does seem to have a ceiling.
4. The desired action does not always lead to (complete) satiation.

This relationship between desire and pleasure gives me an intuitive sense that I desire pleasure—that is, I have an experience that causes me pleasure and then I subsequently desire it. But from the above observations this intuition appears to break down. If pleasure caused desire, then my level of desire should have no influence over my level of pleasure. A scheduled cheat day should be just as enjoyable as an unplanned moment of intense craving—and yet this just isn't the case. It's a subtle twist, but I now think that the experience of pleasure actually depends on desire. And this does make a lot more sense than my default intuitions since one can imagine a person eating themselves to death if food never stopped being met with pleasure. In reality, too much of a good thing tends to lead to disgust.

That's not to say that novel experiences can't be enjoyed because they weren't first desired (though I can think of examples of first experiences where this appears to be the case such as with beer). The introductory experience would for some neurophysiological reason be deemed worthy of repetition, and a subjective experience of desire would result. It is then that the enjoyment—the experience of pleasure—would close the loop when the desired action was taken. The first bite can produce a desire for the second—or even just the continued chewing of the first. Given the state of the brain and the introduction of qualities of a particular environment, the brain seems to latch on and encourage continued interaction with those qualities. Desire is our experience of that "encouragement" and pleasure our reward.

And so it would seem that cheat days are kind of a stupid idea then since you can't plan to desire at a future time (as far as I've experienced so far). *Cheat meals* would actually make more sense if maximizing enjoyment while limiting downside is the goal. Clearly more restraint than indulgence is still required for a healthy life of moderation, but allowing for a limited number of cheat meals (or any such activities) at peak levels of desire should increase one's overall sense of enjoyment in life. I can't know when I will want a pastry *the most* (I actually do want them all of the time so I kind of lied for the sake of example...sorry-not-sorry), but I think having one pastry a week is perfectly acceptable. So instead of scheduling that one event, I can allow for the claiming of that experience at the optimum level at anytime throughout the week. It isn't the pastry that brings me pleasure, but my mind that grants it to me, so it's up to me to decide when to claim that reward when it's most enjoyable.
