---
type: 'blog'
path: "/blog/determining-what-matters"
title: "How to determine what matters"
subtitle: ""
date: "2018-03-18"
published: true
---
Why does anything matter? What does it mean for something to matter? Is it that an action matters if it has a lasting impact? Does value arise from duration and degree of impact? Getting an education seems to matter because it changes one in a way as to have a life-long impact. It is certainly easier to justify large things like that, but what about trivial things? Can trivial things matter or is it by virtue of not mattering that they are trivial?

I spent all day yesterday rearranging my living space. I couldn't shake the idea that it was somehow both meaningful and trivial to do so. It felt trivial, because of all of the things in my life that produce measurable value, moving furniture and deeply contemplating chair placement are not two of them. And yet at the same time it felt meaningful because change seems to have a short-term mood-lifting impact, and also because I was optimizing for function in a way that I hope will make me more productive in the future. I found it pleasurable to think about how this trivial activity would encourage future mental states that I wanted to cultivate. And so this inner conflict of the trivial versus the meaningful arose.

It sounds horribly tedious and soul-crushing to attempt to attribute value to every aspect of one's life in order to optimize...life. From the perspective of our species, how many of our individual actions bubble up and appear to matter? Some certainly do, but most are of absolutely no consequence. But at the same time, it's hard to ignore how small actions often have huge consequences at the level of the individual as well as the species that no one could predict. And so is it really possible to know with absolute certainty that one act is more meaningful than another before observing the final causal impact? Can seemingly trivial acts be trivial if they subsequently produce beneficial results? I think not. The implication being that no isolated action can be deemed of high or low value without consideration for all resulting future states—most of which can't actually be known.

These future states, I imagine, would be different depending on the level of consideration—individual, community, country, species, etc.—but in this moment I'm interested in the individual. Which types of unknown future states could decide the importance of an action? Everything I consider seems to reduce to the state of mind. If I, for example, take an action now that earns money and that money enables a future state of mind free of the stress of poverty, then that action seems to matter. If, however, I have enough money to avoid the stress of poverty and yet continue to take the action simply to accumulate more money, it wouldn't seem to matter as much because little to no positive mental state change occurred. If I am exhausted and find it hard to focus, a nap could be an action that enables the return of my focus upon awaking—that seems to matter. While simply taking a nap because I'm bored or under-stimulated doesn't seem to matter as much.

I like this idea of using states of mind as a way to gauge what matters in life. It seems to provide a more useful framework for guiding one's actions than the typical "getting things done" methodologies. More useful perhaps because it doesn't allow for the discounting of all of the actions that we humans love and yet tend to feel guilty for indulging in. An afternoon walk in the park isn't a "slow day" but an act of contemplation that could lead to future creative states of mind. Not getting enough sleep isn't a badge of honor for the entrepreneur but a foolish decision that will create weakened future states of mind. Spending the day researching a new interest when you could be otherwise "productive" isn't a waste of time but an exploration into new states of mind with all of their future potential benefits. And rearranging a space isn't lost time, but a way to cultivate more mindful focus across the days and months to come. And, after all, it was by "wasting" time rearranging my living space that these thoughts were allowed the freedom to bubble up into my mind in the first place. Had I known ahead of time that moving some furniture would change the way that I think about life, it certainly wouldn't have felt so trivial to me.