---
type: 'blog'
path: "/blog/theory-of-self"
title: "Theory of self(s)"
date: "2018-03-11"
published: true
---

------------------------
Draft
------------------------
When I am hungry, I want to eat. But if I then look in a mirror and notice that I've been eating more than I need to lately, I might decide to resist the desire to eat. In this conflicted state of mind I seem go from a me to a we. There is the me that wants and another me that does not want to want. Which me am I? It's not clear to me (more on him in a moment) because these two "mes" appear to exist at different levels of awareness—the first is aware of the desire, whereas the second is aware of the desire, the long term consequences, and the additional desire to not realize these consequences—and never converge but remain distinct perspectives in a zero-sum game. But now, come to think about it, who is the me that is observing these other mes? This additional me now brings the total mes up to three.

It would be easy to say that these mes are just thoughts and that I am the last me observing these thoughts. But do I want to eat? Yes, I would like that very much. But would I also like to avoid the extra calories? Yes, I would like that very much. Well, then I don't seem to be a me having those thoughts, but different mes identifying with those thoughts. There is certainly a common thread of identity between these mes—each feels in agreement with their specific views including the top observing me which seems to agree with both lower observed mes as well. So perhaps there aren't really many mes but a single me considering and identifying with a different breadth and depth of information at a time like an author writing dialogue for and losing her self in her characters during a single writing session. This seems plausible since I can only be one me at any specific instance of time.

But if I follow this logic through to the sweet beginning, there wouldn't even be a need for a single me at all, but simply an act of identification with the totality of information that is active in the mind in a given moment. I would be whatever I am thinking about. I would not be the thinker of thoughts, but the result of thoughts thought. This feels strange and unfamiliar to me but also somehow intuitive and informative when I think about different examples of cognition. Take for example the prized state of flow where one loses oneself in a task. A complete lack of self-awareness is a critical feature of this state of mind—there is only the task and a great sense of contentment. Where do we go when we are in flow? Perhaps the thinker only emerges when the contents of thought are of the origination of thoughts itself—like looking at the window instead of through the window. When I look at a cloud in the sky, then I am that cloud. When I look at a different cloud, then I become that cloud instead. If I look at the complete sky, then I see all of the clouds that I could become. And if I look at the window, I become the window through which all of the sky is visible and possible to become. But all of this cloud talk is for the birds because it's an analogy that assumes there is an observer which is the very thing that I'm trying to understand in the first place. Sorry.

But then again, if I show you a picture of a window you would have at least two possible perspectives. One could be that you yourself are looking through the window in the picture. A second could be that you are seeing someone else's perspective as they look through the window in the picture. Neither perspective is "correct" in absolute terms since it really is a matter of literal and figurative perspectives. It is the mind that attributes whichever perspective it is most accustomed too. And maybe that is the linchpin to this whole idea. If we assume that a self is a concept of perspective then it can be identified with just like any other thought. If in a current moment the contents of my mind includes food, I could say that I am food-aware, and likewise if the contents includes this concept of self-perspective, I could say that I am self-aware. Now the analogy of the window doesn't seem to break down since the implied observer is just the concept of perspective itself.

I find this theory of self interesting, but there are practical implications that seem to suggest that it could all be true. All of the oddities of human nature exposed by behavioral economics and various strange mental health conditions like dissociative identify disorder or schizophrenic hallucinations, for examples, would not just be explained but expected. Any decision I make wouldn't be made by "me," the person living a life and with a head full of knowledge, but by the active information in the mind at that moment. From moment to moment I could make contradictory decisions while all along reporting a consistent narrative of my motivations. When acting, one set of information would be active in the mind, and when reporting, another set of information which includes the concept of self with all of its attributes would be active. One person with many disparate states of active information each identifying with a particular self or perspective in a moment of time. To be the same self from one moment to the next would require having the exact same information active in the mind in both but with each new experience and thought these contents change. And since each moment harbors a different self, there is no one self to observe the subtle moment-to-moment contradictions that destroy the whole illusion of a constant self.



---- Unused stuff so far---

What about some more practical examples? Why do most people fail at dieting? Well, we spend far more time in front of food than in front of mirrors, and so we should expect to be selves aware of food more often than selves aware of itself in the mirror after food. These aren't two different selves competing but the result of the frequency of the turn taking of mental contents. Each in turn acting as the self, aware of the others when in moments of reflection, but with different perceptions and goals. And so you can remember resolving to avoid donuts while you look down at the donut in your hand with the fresh bite mark. Psychology comes up with complicated explanations for this common contradiction, but to me it feels quite simple: I am just not that exact same person from moment to moment and so there is no, and can be no, conflict. Any perceived conflict is just yet another self emerged from the awareness of the thoughts of previous selves. I can remember resolving not to eat the donut, later eating the donut anyways, while being impartial in the most current moment without any strong opinion on either of these selves simply because I'm neither hungry nor feeling guilty. Or how about when we remember a past event and feel embarrassed about how we acted even though at the time there was no such feeling. Clearly in the current self there is additional information that wasn't present at the time of the remembered event. And so we can remember being a different self, while believing we are the same self. This is the contradiction—the assumption of a constant self.

If we wish to change, we mustn't think of things like will power or behavioral conditioning, but of information and mental contents. If we wish to act in a certain way, we must not expect to follow through anymore than a father should expect their son to follow the family trade. The son will encounter different information and become a different person and the father's plans will seem irrelevant. So we must first expect that the future will belong to a different self and second discover what information created this resolve for this self and third figure out how to make that information available to the next self. In this way, we can increase the odds of the next self feeling the same way as the current self. Recreation of past selves is the key to consistent behavior.
