---
path: /thoughts/subjective-reason
title: The Fallacy of Subjective Reason
published: false
---

### Mind “control”
In science fiction and fantasy, when mind control is a plot element, it is typically assumed that the victim’s will is being violated. But what if we change the method of “control” so that instead of directly giving them different thoughts their physiology is changed so that their subjective moment-by-moment qualitative experience of those thoughts are different? Say, for example, that a person experiences satisfaction by accomplishing some particular task T1 and doesn’t feel the same when accomplishing some other task T2. Let the mind control event in this fictional world simply be the swapping of  tasks capable of producing the “victim’s” satisfaction. This would at first concern the “victim”, but we’ve all experienced similar changes of value in life. The antagonist needn’t do any more work or continuous interventions; that one is enough to satisfy their aim. And the “victim” will slowly adapt and find that performing this other task T2 is more satisfying than T1—they discover what truly makes them happy, or whatever. They are now performing a task that they wouldn’t have before the intervention, but nonetheless truly feel a subjective sense of satisfaction and moving forward will continue to perform T2 without any additional or continuous “control” or intervention by the antagonist. 

Are they being controlled? Are they truly a victim? Is their subjective reason for performing T2 somehow invalid even though it truly causes them to feel satisfied?
### Mind “control”: Version 2
I say that they are not being controlled but that they are, however, a victim. I take it that reasons are always non-subjective so that no matter what subjective aspect of consciousness a person might point to as a reason for their action they have actually failed to give a reason. So by changing the ersatz reason for action, the antagonist hasn’t actually changed the victim’s reason for action—so they have not controlled their action at all. Consider the following modified scenario:

Let’s say that the antagonist sets out to control another person, but this time fails. The victim still performs T1 as they were going to before the intervention even though their physiology was successfully changed just as with the first victim. Additionally, this second victim no longer desires to perform T1 or feels any qualitative, subjective sense of pleasure or satisfaction from doing so as a result of the intervention. They may even find themselves desiring to perform T2 instead. And yet, still, they perform T1. Subjective reason giving fails to explain the outcome in this case. But, an objective reason can make perfect sense of it. Let’s say that the victim performs T1 because a close friend or family member is depending on them. In such a case, for most of us, it becomes irrelevant how we feel; it only matters what must be done. 

What’s important to emphasize is not the specific reason, only that it is not based on the subjective qualities of experience. When such a reason is present and is the force behind an action, mind “control” of the form in question cannot actually be control at all because it does not bring about a different outcome. And yet, I still think that the person is a victim because something has been taken from them. 
### Reason and perception 
In the best cases, we either are naturally or become calibrated to act in accordance with reasons that we have whether we are aware of them as such explicitly or not. In typical, non-pathological people, we can get by with heuristics such as “do what’s right” because “it feels right”. But for people whose feelings differ from the typical, such heuristics fail to guide them. In the same way, the subject qualities of visual perception are a typical way to acquire knowledge of world, but a color blind person cannot solely rely on visual perception to learn the color features of the world but must depend on the reports of others as well as rational deduction. 

But even typical people experience varying degrees of subjective feelings and desires for a plethora of reasons such fatigue, hunger, and emotional unrest to name a few. For all people, reason—objective reason—is the stabilizer, providing the consistency that most action in life requires for success. It is also the way by which most of us acquire skills for successful action to begin with. In the best cases, our subjective feelings seem to conform with and be shaped by our capacity for reason. 

For these reasons, while I don’t think a person under such external intervention can in fact be controlled, I nonetheless believe that they are victims. What has been taken from them is whatever calibrated or contingent nature they have such that they can no longer perceive or come to perceive the reasons that they have apart from rational thought alone. It is a part of our nature to feel as well as reason about what we ought to do and in the best cases they are in sync. Changing one’s capacity to perceive in this way is just like damaging a person’s visual perception. And so, in this way, they are a victim even though they haven’t been controlled.   

### Inclination to be free
It seems to me that people tend to confuse the often reliable nature of desire, feelings, and satisfaction with the objective reasons that in the best scenarios they track. I also suspect that in a properly functioning animal these aspects of its nature endeavor to latch on to objective reasons and calibrate its behavior. I also think, though this is a topic for another time, that our concept of free will picks out this tension between nature and reason in that at least the sense of freedom that most people have seems to arise from this tension between subjective inclination in some form and the rational capacity to think through our actions with indifference to inclination. `